
*Perceiving the agency of harmful agents: A test of dehumanization*  
*versus moral typecasting accounts*, by Khamitov et. al., discusses different considerations and implications of perception of agency and morality, particularly in contention with moral typecasting theory. They found that across six studies, participants perceived harmful agents as having less agency than neutral or positive agents. 

Moral typecasting theory posits that harmful agents (people who do harm to others–although this research does also discuss non-human agents) are or should be perceived as having more agency than neutral agents. Gray & Wegner, who they cite throughout their explanation of moral typecasting, say that "when a person commits an act of cruelty they are 'transformed' or 'typecasted' in the eyes of those bearing witness to their actions... they are attributed the qualities befitting a 'moral agent.'" (p. 33) 

Moral typecasting theory (MTT) separates moral "agents" from moral "patients." This means they are seen as rational and capable of self-control, but not without capacity to suffer, which a victim or patient has. People who have been subjected to cruelty are seen as the opposite, patients but not agents. Khamitov et. al. focuses on the former half of this theory. 

Khamitov et. al. make an opposing argument to MTT, where harmful agents are instead denied agency in line with the human impulse to dehumanize people who act cruelly. They raise research on dehumanization which shows that harmful agents are seen as lacking civility and warmth and are attributed animalistic or machine-like traits. 

They raise a number of difficulties in dealing with MTT. First, agency is defined in a number of ways across the existing literature: in terms of ability to reason, communicate, self-control, or in being active, tenacious, capable of goal-achievement, and exercising control over the environment. These definitions are drawn from mind perception literature and social psychology respectively. From these definitions they extract two aspects: intelligence/cognition and goal-oriented activity. 

Across the six studies they reviewed, they found that the data reflected dehumanization of harmful agents rather than MTT. Because harmful agents were attributed less agency, they were "afforded less moral standing (e.g., granted fewer protections and rights)." (p. 43) This occured for both human and non-human agents (corporations), and to varying degrees of harmful behavior. They also separated the perception of agency from the desire to see agents punished for their actions: participant's views were based on the harmful agent's motivations and actions. 

These studies did find that MTT held for "benevolent" or agents whose actions impacted others postitively. They theorize that this is due to denial of "patiency" (emotional responsiveness) to harmful agents, although it could also be simply a reaction to agents emotional callousness. Alternatively, MTT may be too narrow and overly focused on power. Gray's earlier study which provided the experimental results that he developed into MTT was focused on exertion of force, rather than the studies Khamitov et. al. reviewed which are about attribution of agency, which is broadly defined. However, one study which did align much more closely with agency-as-power still found dehumanization rather than MTT. On dehumanization, they found that the attribution of less agency correlated with lower scores on other humanness traits such as rationality, refinement, and self-restraint.