Contemporary Art and Cybernetics: Waves of Cybernetic Discourse within Conceptual, Video and New Media Art, Etan J. Ilfeld
[[Ilfeld-ContemporaryArtCybernetics-2012.pdf]]

I've been looking into the history of cybernetics and the early internet/video art movement; I read an article about this titled *Contemporary Art and Cybernetics: Waves of Cybernetic Discourse within Conceptual, Video and New Media Art*, by Etan J. Ilfeld. It was published 2012 in Leonardo, The International Society for the Arts, Sciences and Technology through the MIT Press. This article helped me understand the early art and technology movement of the 60s and 70s, as artists, philosophers, and computer scientists were often not only working together, but in Renaissance-man fashion, one individual drawing from and building on/with all disciplines. One description jumped out to me, of neuroscientist Humberto Maturana who, in his study of frog visual systems, theorized about emergence and embodiment; terms familiar to a student who has taken COGS 300. The text connects this to second-wave cybernetics: "Second-wave cybernetic discourse stressed that language is structurally coupled as a social system founded on a 'reciprocal consensus' and therefore not representative of an external reality but rather of 'consensual objects'." (59) Emergence gained even greater importance in later waves of cybernetics and digital art. One of the last points Ilfeld raised, one that I think about not infrequently, is the lag between art and technology; artists have been over a decade behind in engaging with cybernetics' (now, GAI) advances. Ilfeld says, "Perhaps these ideas first had to be incorporated into the technologies these artists used ... technological history is often the outcome of social struggles between powerful interest groups. Perhaps the correlation between cybernetics and art is itself a form of emergence?" Understanding art as an emergence in and of itself takes some of the pressure off of being "behind," feeling the need to "catch up" to the most recent technological advancements. 

I met with professor T'ai Smith from the Art History department this week to talk about potentially doing my 402 project with her as my supervisor. She is a part of the Studio for Extensive Aesthetics (SEA), headed by artist Amber Frid-Jimenez. Smith recently published an article in the Invisible Culture Journal titled "Modeling Charisma: AI's Fashion Mirror Stage." While much of her work has been focused on textile arts, weaving, and fashion, her investigation into AI as an art object and cultural force has resonated with my own interests. She's studied cybernetics and is very knowledgeable about philosophy and art theory (which is ostensibly also philosophy), and her colleague Frid-Jimenez has created her own ML models and created artworks with them in ways that I would be intereted in learning more about, if not pursuing myself. Her work emphasizes some of the aforementioned emergent behaviors of these models, as AI outputs compiled reveal the ways that it creates and understand visual structures. This in turn can highlight certain trends, such as with her ML model trained on Vogue covers. Also, as indicated by the title of her recent article, she is familiar with the history of psychology and psychoanalysis; which, despite being quite outdated, is still interesting to play with from the viewpoint of a modern psychology researcher/student. I'm looking forward to learning more about her work and the SEA.
