### [PHIL 451 Canvas Page](https://canvas.ubc.ca/courses/152310)
### [[PHIL451 Syllabus - (2024-2025 Term 2).pdf]]

# 01.07.25 Syllabus Lecture 1
[[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 1.pdf]]
[[PHIL451 Syllabus - (2024-2025 Term 2).pdf]]

Course themes/core concepts
- *Mind/body problem*
- Physicalism
- Mental causation
	- Mental content/"aboutness"
- Consciousness
	- Antiphysicalism
		- Dualism
		- Mysterianism
		- Illusionism
		- Panpsychism
			- Idealism

#### Enlightenment
**Physicalism/Materialism**
- Proposition that both terrestrial and astronomical phenomena can be explained by the same laws (physics) → some (inc. Hobbes) conclude that all natural phenomena can be described by mathematical physics; *everything is physical*
	- Hobbes - first to articulate a computational theory of thought
**Dualism (& broadly, antiphysicalism)**
- Descartes
- Scientists/humans (*beings with minds*) 'systematically elude physical explanation'
- Bodies are governed by mechanical laws, minds are not

**Physicalist strategies**
- *Causation
- If our mental states affect the physical world (ie. a thought leads to an action), they must be physical

**Antiphysicalist strategies**
What can't we explain in physical/mechanistic terms?
- *Content*: aka intentionality, mental representation
	- How can a mental state represent things other than themselves? 
	- (What it is that you love, where it is that you go, etc. Some debate about if intentionality is a quality of all mental states or not)
- *Consciousness*: aka qualia - subjective quality, phenomenology
	- Something that we feel and can recognize but not easily verbalize - 'what it's like'
	- Many consider the most puzzling aspect

***What is physicalism?***
Completeness question: What does it mean to say that *everything* is physical? 
Condition question: What counts as physical? What are our criteria? 


# 01.09.25 Lecture 2: Physicalism: the Completeness Question
#### [[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 2.pdf]]

> [!example] 01.09.25 HW
> [[Stoljar - Physicalism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)|Stoljar]], “Physicalism” (SEP entry), §§1-3 
> [[Seager_Consciousness and physicalism.pdf|Seager]], Theories of Consciousness, pp. 7-13
Physicalism: worldview of science

***What does it mean to say everything is physical?***
#### Physicalism: strict numerical identity, 'Identity Physicalism'
"**Entity**" - most generic word for a 'thing' to avoid categorizing 
All numerical entities are identical to physical entities 
- Metaphysical distinction between *particulars*: object, e.g. piece of chalk, which is individual, unrepeatable, and exists in a specific temporal and spatial period, and *properties*: the ways that it is, color
- Predication of subject = attribution of a property. *Property is repeatable*. *Particular/subject is not*
	- Tokens/types: "a a b" = How many letters? 3 tokens, and 2 types. 
Two kinds of Identity Physicalism
- **Token-Identity Physicalism**: Particulars
	- All actual particulars are physical objects
	- Too strong and too weak
		- Not every concept has to be a physical object
		- Anti-physicalists can still think all particulars are physical; all particulars are physical, and some have nonphysical properties (*Property dual.s* view, of many contemporary dualists - in contrast with Descartes' dualism)
		- *Substance dual.s*; reject token phys. 
			- Things instantiate irreducably nonphysical properties, such as phenomenal properties

- **Type-Identity Physicalism** (also called **Reductive Physicalism**): Properties
	- Every property of an object is a physical property 
	- J.C.C. Smart, 'Sensations and Brain Properties'; the mental property of feeling something, thinking something, is the same as certain physical properties of the brain
		- e.g. *C fiber activation (CFF)* = being in pain, 'neural correlate of pain'
		- Argument from parsimony/simplicity
	- *Reduces* a property to a physical property; a property is nothing but a physical property: metaphysically reduces the experience of pain to a brain state
	- (skipped slide about reductionism)
	- *Multiple realizability argument against reductive physicalism*
		- Example: we come in contact with an alien species, we get along swimmingly, politics, friendships, relationships, now intertwine; then, we do an autopsy and find they have no brain, no physical location for all the emotions they express: do you now discount all emotions they showed as not real? 
		- Octopi similar: far different brains, but show mentality (thought, emotional (?sort of?) reactions)
		- Relationship between mental and physical is not 1:1, other materials/mental states can be associated with things like pain in other creatures
		- [[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 2.pdf#page=14&selection=0,43,2,21|PHIL451 002 - Lecture 2, page 14]] end


> [!example] 01.14.25 HW
> [[Montero - (2002) The Body Problem.pdf]]
> [[Stoljar - Physicalism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)#5.4 Methodological Issues|Stoljar- Physicalism, 5.4]]
> 
>Optional: Montero, “Post-physicalism” Arguing for physicalism: the problem of mental causation

# 01.14.25 Lecture 3 Supervenience
[[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 2.pdf]] cont. 
**Supervenience**, supervenience physicalism

#### Multiple Realizability Argument cont.
[[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 2.pdf#page=14&selection=0,43,2,21|PHIL451 002 - Lecture 2, page 14]] onward
- Mostly review from end of last class
- Not identity but realization

We now want a definition of physicalism will be broad enough to encompass Reductive and Nonreductive Physicalism but narrow enough to exclude Property Dualism. → 
#### Nonreductive Physicalism
**(Role) Functionalism** (*func.s*) most well-known version
- Mistake to identify psyc. states w/ phys. states
	- Hardware realizes software, runs it, but are not same: software can be implemented in diff. phys. systems
- Mental states such as pain = *Second order functional role property* aka. higher order properties
	- Having some property which plays a certain role
	- Describing mental states as input/output profiles, computational roles

> “Pain is the property of having some property or other that realizes the PAIN role”

- Func.s would not necessarily describe pain as realized phys.y
But, can we describe phenomenological experiences? 
But, if pain is something other than CFF, aren't we straying to dualism 

#### Metaphysical supervenience
Serat example
Psyc. prop. are nothing but high level patterns of complex dist. of phys. prop. 
If you change the rules/global properties, you change the realizations. If two things have the same properties, they have the same realization, and vice versa

**Supervenience physicalism (SP)** aka *Minimal physicalism*
> Physical properties to mental properties have the same relationship as dots in painting to global properties of painting (patterns in dots, matrix which dictates where dots are/aren't)

Physicalism is true IFF any world that is a minimal physical duplicate is a duplicate *simpliciter* aka *perfect duplicate*
 → Minimal physical duplicate is identical and has nothing other than what world has/nothing in addition
 - Therefore, everything in our world *supervenes* on the physical

If **SP** is true: A minimal physical duplicate is a mental/psychological duplicate of our world

**SP** classifies **nonreductive phys./role func.s** and **reductive/type idenity phys.** as a version of physicalism: 
- Nonreductive: mental properties metaphysically supervene on physical properties, they are distinct
- Reductive: every property (trivially) supervenes on itself
**SP** avoids problems w/ **token phys.**
- Supreme court of canada isn't an object, but it metaphysically supervenes on physical objects

**Property dualists** reject the claim that mental prop. *metaphysically* supervene on phys. properties
- They would say that a minimal phys. dup. would not necessarily be fully identical because there is something extra on top of physics that make our world unique

**SP** allows for physicalism to be false, in other worlds. 
"Modal" defn.: a definition in terms of how mental properties and physical properties covary across possible worlds
- But, doesn't explain exact nonmodal relation "in virtue of which the two sets of properties modally covary."

**SP:** ***Mental properties are realized by physical properties*** 

# 01.16.25 Lecture 4 Continuum of Physicalism
[[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 3.pdf]]

#### Continuum of physicalism
**Least → Most physicalist** 
Substance dualism → property dualism → nonreductive physicalism → reductive physicalism

**Substance dualism**
Descartes
Mind = nonphysical
*Substantivalism*
- minds = substance/object, aka soul/spirit: there is a thing that is a mind, which bears mental properties
*Immaterialism*
- minds are wholly mental and nonphysical
*Property non-identity*
- mental properties are numerically distinct from physical properties

Substance dualists reject token & type & supervenience physicalism

**Property dualism**
Substantivalism is false; physical brain has mental properties, but they are wholly nonphysical 
- Upholds property non-identity
- Consistent with token physicalism, rejects type & supervenience

**Nonreductive physicalism**
Supervenience is true but mental properties are numerically distinct because they are "higher order" (*not* because they are fundamentally nonphysical)
- Embrace multiple realizability 
- Rejects type but consistent with token physicalism
- Affirms property nonidentity: differs from property dualism on supervenience

**Reductive physicalism**
Strict identity: Supervenience is true and mental properties are strictly numerically identical with (first order) physical properties
- Accepts token and type physicalism, rejects property nonidentity

#### "Everything is physical" - *The Condition Question*
**[[Stoljar - Physicalism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)|Stoljar]]**: Completeness question and Condition question 
**[[Montero - (2002) The Body Problem.pdf|Montero]]**

##### Defining the physical
**Proposal 1: Ostensive definition**
> Point at a rock. See it? That’s something physical! (see Montero 2002, p. 184

But physicisists talk about weird little particles that are also physical 

# 01.21.25 Lecture 5 Montero 
[[Montero - (2002) The Body Problem.pdf]] 
[[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 3.pdf#page=9|PHIL451 002 - Lecture 3, page 9]]

**Proposal 2: Definition by negation**
Criterion of the non-physical/immaterial 

**Proposal 3: Definition by deference - ask the physicists**
"Hempel's Dilemma": do we define microphysical by current physics or by future unspecified physics
- Horn 1: Physicalism can't be defined on current physics because we definitely don't know everything
- Horn 2: Physicalism can't be defined on future physics because the proposal is too vague 
	- Vacuous/trivial

Montero says the fundamental stake is whether any aspect of the mental is fundamental 

*Montero's alternative:* 
- There is a fundamental level of reality 
- Mental is grounded/supervenient to non-mental 
- basic level of reality          


# 01.23.25 Lecture 6 Causal Argument 
#### [[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 4.pdf]]

> [!example] HW 01.23.25
> [[Papineau - The case for materialism.pdf]]
>[[Seager_Consciousness and physicalism.pdf#page=7&selection=0,0,2,2|Seager Theories of Consciousness, pp. 13-17]]

**Two broad ways to use causal efficacy of the mental to attack a metaphysical account of mind**

Unemployment analogy: mental events *unsuited* to do causal work (unqualified)
Or, mental events *have no causal work* to do (no job openings)


Physical → mental 
- Ie. experiencing sensation, pain
Mental → physical 
- Ie. deciding to do an action

Descartes thought that in order to have a relation, there must be contact: but, how can the immaterial soul "contact" the physical? 

#### Papineau: The case for reductive physicalism?
> *Abstract*
> The basic causal argument for materialism is that since physics is causally complete, conscious states must either be physical, or they must be epiphenomenal “danglers” with no causal inuence on the physical world. Papineau explores this argument in detail, paying particular attention to the concept of causation, the meaning of “physical”, the relevance of functionalism and other versions of nonreductive physicalism, and the status of the claim that physics is causally closed

***Papineau's causal argument for physicalism: Three claims/premises***
- **(1) Efficacy:** Mental events sometimes sufficiently cause physical events (in virtue of their mental properties)
	- Mental acts have physical effects
- **(2) Completeness** *(aka, causal closure of the physical)***:** Every physical event has a fully sufficient physical cause
	- Physical universe = closed system
- **(3) No systematic overdetermination:** Physical effects of mental causes are not systematiclaly causally overdetermined – they do not systematically have more than one fully sufficient cause
	- Death by firing squad: Death is causally overdetermined because there's no way of knowing which bullet killed him 
- **(bonus) Exclusion:** No effect has more than one sufficient cause unless it is causally overdetermined
	- Papineau does not make explicit but Bennett does

***What does it mean to deny these?***
**Deny efficacy:** Reject 'Alexander's dictum': to be is to have causal powers. Intentional agency ceases to meaningfully exist
**Deny no systematic overdetermination:** Treat all mental-physical causation as "death by firing squad"–It seems (to many) extremely implausible that mental→physical causation is systematically/pervasively overdetermined
**Deny exclusion:** To deny that an event's having more than one sufficient cause is by itself sufficient for being causally overdetermined

Papineau isn't very explicit about his argument, but can be interpreted as *rejecting* **distinctness**
- That mental properties are distinct from physical properties

# 01.28.25 Lecture 7 Bennett - Causal Exclusion 

> [!example] HW
> Schedule: Gibb, “Defending Dualism”
> Lecture: Bennett, [[Bennett - Exclusion again.pdf|“Exclusion Again”]] 

[[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 5.pdf]]
*Review*
Let p stand for some behavior
For every p there is a mental event m that causes p 
$\forall p, m \rightarrow p$
m = p* (previous physical event)
Completeness clause (Papineau): Every physical event has a fully sufficient physical cause

#### Bennett
Reject exclusion (rather than distinctness), uphold efficacy, completeness, no systematic overdetermination

> How does an event have multiple distinct causes but not be causally overdetermined?

**Explanation in logic (slightly diff symbols from previously**
e = effect
m = mental cause
p = physical cause

##### Counterfactual argument

$\square \rightarrow$ = "counterfactually implies"
material conditional vs counterfactual conditional
SIM = "similar"

Counterfactual conditionals are vacuously true whenever they have an impossible antecedent 

$$P ~□→ Q~~iff~~\forall w(SIM(P(w)) → Q(w)$$

If no one is drinking alcohol, we don't need to worry that they are 19: it is *vacuously true* that they are obeying the law

"nearest possible worlds"= worlds that are as similar to ours as possible, except that p is true
- Counterfactual is true if in all of these worlds, q is also true

# 01.30.25 Lecture 8 Bennett cont. 


> [!example] HW
> [[Bennett - Exclusion again.pdf]]


#### Overdeterminacy
[[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 5.pdf#page=15&selection=2,0,2,3|PHIL451 002 - Lecture 5, page 15]]
**(O1)** If m had happened without p, e would still have happened: (m & ¬p) □→ e. 
**(O2)** If p had happened without m, e would still have happened: (p & ¬m) □→ e.

- The upshot (according to Bennett): whichever way you define “causal sufficiency”, nonreductive physicalists have a plausible way to claim that O2 is either vacuously true or false

# 02.06.25 Lecture 9/10 Gibb on Completeness
 9 cancelled for snow 
 [[PHIL451 002 - Lecture 6.pdf]]

Gibb's "exclusion" is completely diff. from Bennett's lol

Gibb feels that Completeness is not well argued for by most physicalists

Recall Papineau’s Causal Argument for Physicalism (or Gibb’s reconstruction of it on p. 365) 
1. Mental causes have physical effects. Efficacy. 
2. Every physical effect has a sufficient physical cause. Completeness.
3. There is no systematic causal overdetermination. No Systematic Overdetermination.

Therefore: 
4. Mental causes are identical with physical causes

#### Papineau
##### Papineau's argument for Completeness
1. Every physical system is "conservative"; law of conservation of energy 
2. There is probably no non-physical energy 
Therefore: 
1. Probably, every physical effect has a sufficient physical cause (Completeness)

##### Notes on Premise 1 (Conservation)
- Physical conservation laws are "silent" about what forms of energy exist-are only about the magnitude of energy in system conserved 
- Conservation is, in principle, consistent with the existence of fundamentally non-physical/"psychic" energy 

##### Notes on Premise 2 (Energy)
- "Argument from fundamental forces": we have strong evidence that all "high-level" forces and energy 'reduce to' lower-level forces/energy 
	- We can break everything down into physics/smaller parts
	- In history of science, we have always found the things behind "irreducable forces": everything reduces
- "Argument physiology": if fundamental, irreducible forces do exist, we would have found evidence for their existence by now: so, they likely don't exist

#### Gibb
Papineau's argument is stronger than just "Completeness":
- Not just, "every physical effect has a physical cause" - *No physical effect has a non-physical cause*: She calls this **exclusion** (Gibb exclusion, **G.Exc**)

***Preliminary***
If she's correct, this completely changes the game for the traditional physicalist argument
- Systematic overdetermination out of the picture because now there's no overdetermination

(*Q: is G.Exc = reductive phys? A: seems like yes (he's not 100% sure)*)

##### Main point: Papnieau's argument is invalid
Substituting Completeness for **G.Exc**:
1. Every physical system is conservative or is part of a larger system that is conservative. Conservation 
2. There is (probably) no non-physical energy. Energy 
Therefore: 
1. Probably, no physical effect has a non-physical cause. Gibb-Exclusion

**Red flag:** "cause" appears *only in the conclusion*

Gibb proposes we **add** at least two premises: 
- **Physical affectability (PA)**: 
	- The only way that non-phys affects phys is by *1) affecting* or *2) redistributing* the amt. of energy/momentum w/in it
- **Redistribution (Reb)**: 
	- You can't redistribute energy/momentum w/o supplying energy/momentum

Gibb argues the case for these premises is not easy to make as either physics or metaphysics. She suggests some proposals that would support PA/Reb:
- *Transference*: causation is the transference of a quantity from cause to effect, where this quantity is energy/momentum 
	- Gibb: this makes conservation redundant, & if we replace conservation w/ transference, we still have to interpret the *scope* of transference (narrow-physical causation, or broad-all causation? either way, we end up back at G.Exc)
- *There is empirical support for PA and Reb that dualists are ignorant of*
	- Gibb: No, there isn't
- *Psychophys. causation becomes unintelligible if we deny PA*
	- I hate this slide
	- Nomological/regularity
	- Counterfactual theories
