This article is titled "Self-Perception as a Foundation for Self-Knowledge," and was written by George Butterworth, a researcher in the Department of Psychology at Sussex University. It was published in Psychological Inquiry in 1992. 

Butterworth responds to a number of different theories of the role perception plays in self-recognition. James Gibson's model, the "direct-realist, ecological theory of perception for the origins of self-knowledge," is most frequently used in support of his theory. One clarification that he makes in the introduction is that there is a point of discontinuity in development as the mirror stage is reached, but that there exist varying levels of self-knowledge among organisms which do not demonstrate mirror self-recognition. He later adds that Gibson's theory "substitute(s) an information-based account of perception for sensation-based theories."

There are five different kinds of self knowledge distinguished by Neisser; the ecological, interpersonal, extended, and private selves, and self-concept. Butterworth primarily focuses on ecological self, defined as "the self as directly perceived with respect to the physical environment." He cites infant "moving room" studies as evidence for the self/world distinction appearing at the beginning of development. Butterworth points out that this assumption separates his theory from Piaget and Freud, which often use "adualistic confusion" where experience is essential "where sensation is meaningless in the absence of experience"– as the foundation for the origin of the self. 

He then says that Neisser's definition of self-awareness is demonstrated in moving room studies. Infants are given a visual that makes it seem like a room is moving and adjust their head to rebalance accordingly, even if it's not actually moving. This demonstrates a relationship between self and stimuli as early as 2 months. This also applies to other species, as day-old chicks are also responsive in this way. 

Next, he talks about interpersonal self awareness or self knowledge. He says that there is different knowledge of both "social objects" and "physical objects" that work together, since social objects are also physical objects. This means that there might be less difference between ecological and interpersonal selves than had been proposed by Neisser's 5 distinct kinds of self-knowledge. He brings in the work of Walker- Andrews, which is about the role of emotion perception in the construction of the "self." Imitation of emotions, a crucial part of infant social and self development, relies on both a perception of emotion (visually) and an understanding of what feeling state that corresponds to, "a 'metaphorical' process of detecting abstract correspondences within perceptual information." However, it is important to not over-attribute abilities to infants. There is a difference between how an infant imitates behaviors and how a 1-year old imitates behaviors. He gives an example: "The 1-year-old, but not the neonate, can use tongue protrusion symbolically, as Piaget's infant daughter showed by working out how the sliding drawer of a matchbox operates by sliding her tongue in and out of her mouth." 

Butterworth then moves to the biological realm of the self. He says that biological principles should inform theories of "ecological psychology and direct perception." This also shows the importance of uniqueness in both individual biology and individual selfhood. 

He differentiates his stance from another researcher, Kellman: "I did not wish to characterize the developmental process as a shift from perception to conception... Perception of self becomes embedded within other modes of knowing." 

He concludes with wrapping up his argument, that information from direct perception is what allows infants to develop their first idea of selfhood, from which point they can both use stored information and perceptual information to continue to learn. He also cautions against using the mirror task to delineate organisms which have self awareness and which do not. 